prince of Verona. a young nobleman kinsman to the prince. heads of two houses at variance with each other. An old man cousin to Capulet. Second Capulet son to Montague. kinsman to the prince and friend to Romeo. nephew to Montague and friend to Romeo. nephew to Lady Capulet. Franciscans. servant to Romeo. servants to Capulet. servant to Juliets nurse. servant to Montague. An Apothecary. Apothecary Three Musicians. First Musician Second Musician Third Musician Page to Paris another Page an officer. wife to Montague. wife to Capulet. daughter to Capulet. Nurse to Juliet. Nurse Citizens of Verona several Men and Women relations to both houses Maskers Guards Watchmen and Attendants. First Citizen Servant First Servant Second Servant First Watchman Second Watchman Third Watchman Chorus. Verona Mantua. Two households both alike in dignity In fair Verona where we lay our scene From ancient grudge break to new mutiny Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. From forth the fatal loins of these two foes pair of star-crossd lovers take their life Whole misadventured piteous overthrows Do with their death bury their parents strife. The fearful passage of their death-markd love And the continuance of their parents rage Which but their childrens end nought could remove Is now the two hours traffic of our stage The which if you with patient ears attend What here shall miss our toil shall strive to mend. Verona. public place. Enter and of the house of Capulet armed with swords and bucklers Gregory o my word well not carry coals. No for then we should be colliers. mean an we be in choler well draw. Ay while you live draw your neck out o the collar. strike quickly being moved. But thou art not quickly moved to strike. dog of the house of Montague moves me. To move is to stir and to be valiant is to stand therefore if thou art moved thou runnst away. dog of that house shall move me to stand will take the wall of any man or maid of Montagues. That shows thee a weak slave for the weakest goes to the wall. True and therefore women being the weaker vessels are ever thrust to the wall therefore will push Montagues men from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men. Tis all one will show myself a tyrant when have fought with the men will be cruel with the maids and cut off their heads. The heads of the maids? Ay the heads of the maids or their maidenheads take it in what sense thou wilt. They must take it in sense that feel it. Me they shall feel while am able to stand and tis known am a pretty piece of flesh. Tis well thou art not fish if thou hadst thou hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes two of the house of the Montagues. My naked weapon is out quarrel will back thee. How! turn thy back and run? Fear me not. No marry fear thee! Let us take the law of our sides let them begin. will frown as pass by and let them take it as they list. Nay as they dare. will bite my thumb at them which is a disgrace to them if they bear it. Enter and Do you bite your thumb at us sir? do bite my thumb sir. Do you bite your thumb at us sir? Aside to Is the law of our side if say ay? No. No sir do not bite my thumb at you sir but bite my thumb sir. Do you quarrel sir? Quarrel sir! no sir. If you do sir am for you serve as good a man as you. No better. Well sir. Say better here comes one of my masters kinsmen. Yes better sir. You lie. Draw if you be men. Gregory remember thy swashing blow. They fight Enter Part fools! Put up your swords you know not what you do. Beats down their swords Enter What art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? Turn thee Benvolio look upon thy death. do but keep the peace put up thy sword Or manage it to part these men with me. What drawn and talk of peace! hate the word As hate hell all Montagues and thee Have at thee coward! They fight Enter several of both houses who join the fray then enter Citizens with clubs First Citizen Clubs bills and partisans! strike! beat them down! Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues! Enter in his gown and What noise is this? Give me my long sword ho! crutch a crutch! why call you for a sword? My sword say! Old Montague is come And flourishes his blade in spite of me. Enter and Thou villain Capulet--Hold me not let me go. Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe. Enter with Attendants Rebellious subjects enemies to peace Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-- Will they not hear? What ho! you men you beasts That quench the fire of your pernicious rage With purple fountains issuing from your veins On pain of torture from those bloody hands Throw your mistemperd weapons to the ground And hear the sentence of your moved prince. Three civil brawls bred of an airy word By thee old Capulet and Montague Have thrice disturbd the quiet of our streets And made Veronas ancient citizens Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments To wield old partisans in hands as old Cankerd with peace to part your cankerd hate If ever you disturb our streets again Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. For this time all the rest depart away You Capulet shall go along with me And Montague come you this afternoon To know our further pleasure in this case To old Free-town our common judgment-place. Once more on pain of death all men depart. Exeunt all but and Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? Speak nephew were you by when it began? Here were the servants of your adversary And yours close fighting ere did approach drew to part them in the instant came The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared Which as he breathed defiance to my ears He swung about his head and cut the winds Who nothing hurt withal hissd him in scorn While we were interchanging thrusts and blows Came more and more and fought on part and part Till the prince came who parted either part. where is Romeo? saw you him to-day? Right glad am he was not at this fray. Madam an hour before the worshippd sun Peerd forth the golden window of the east troubled mind drave me to walk abroad Where underneath the grove of sycamore That westward rooteth from the citys side So early walking did see your son Towards him made but he was ware of me And stole into the covert of the wood measuring his affections by my own That most are busied when theyre most alone Pursued my humour not pursuing his And gladly shunnd who gladly fled from me. Many a morning hath he there been seen With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew. Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs But all so soon as the all-cheering sun Should in the furthest east begin to draw The shady curtains from Auroras bed Away from the light steals home my heavy son And private in his chamber pens himself Shuts up his windows locks far daylight out And makes himself an artificial night Black and portentous must this humour prove Unless good counsel may the cause remove. My noble uncle do you know the cause? neither know it nor can learn of him. Have you importuned him by any means? Both by myself and many other friends But he his own affections counsellor Is to himself--I will not say how true-- But to himself so secret and so close So far from sounding and discovery As is the bud bit with an envious worm Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air Or dedicate his beauty to the sun. Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow. We would as willingly give cure as know. Enter See where he comes so please you step aside Ill know his grievance or be much denied. would thou wert so happy by thy stay To hear true shrift. Come madam lets away. Exeunt and Good-morrow cousin. Is the day so young? But new struck nine. Ay me! sad hours seem long. Was that my father that went hence so fast? It was. What sadness lengthens Romeos hours? Not having that which having makes them short. In love? Out-- Of love? Out of her favour where am in love. Alas that love so gentle in his view Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof! Alas that love whose view is muffled still Should without eyes see pathways to his will! Where shall we dine? me! What fray was here? Yet tell me not for have heard it all. Heres much to do with hate but more with love. Why then brawling love! loving hate! any thing of nothing first create! heavy lightness! serious vanity! Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms! Feather of lead bright smoke cold fire sick health! Still-waking sleep that is not what it is! This love feel that feel no love in this. Dost thou not laugh? No coz rather weep. Good heart at what? At thy good hearts oppression. Why such is loves transgression. Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast Which thou wilt propagate to have it prest With more of thine this love that thou hast shown Doth add more grief to too much of mine own. Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs Being purged a fire sparkling in lovers eyes Being vexd a sea nourishd with lovers tears What is it else? a madness most discreet choking gall and a preserving sweet. Farewell my coz. Soft! will go along An if you leave me so you do me wrong. Tut have lost myself am not here This is not Romeo hes some other where. Tell me in sadness who is that you love. What shall groan and tell thee? Groan! why no. But sadly tell me who. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will Ah word ill urged to one that is so ill! In sadness cousin do love a woman. aimd so near when supposed you loved. right good mark-man! And shes fair love. right fair mark fair coz is soonest hit. Well in that hit you miss shell not be hit With Cupids arrow she hath Dians wit And in strong proof of chastity well armd From loves weak childish bow she lives unharmd. She will not stay the siege of loving terms Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold she is rich in beauty only poor That when she dies with beauty dies her store. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste? She hath and in that sparing makes huge waste For beauty starved with her severity Cuts beauty off from all posterity. She is too fair too wise wisely too fair To merit bliss by making me despair She hath forsworn to love and in that vow Do live dead that live to tell it now. Be ruled by me forget to think of her. teach me how should forget to think. By giving liberty unto thine eyes Examine other beauties. Tis the way To call hers exquisite in question more These happy masks that kiss fair ladies brows Being black put us in mind they hide the fair He that is strucken blind cannot forget The precious treasure of his eyesight lost Show me a mistress that is passing fair What doth her beauty serve but as a note Where may read who passd that passing fair? Farewell thou canst not teach me to forget. Ill pay that doctrine or else die in debt. Exeunt street. Enter and Servant But Montague is bound as well as In penalty alike and tis not hard think For men so old as we to keep the peace. Of honourable reckoning are you both And pity tis you lived at odds so long. But now my lord what say you to my suit? But saying oer what have said before My child is yet a stranger in the world She hath not seen the change of fourteen years Let two more summers wither in their pride Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride. Younger than she are happy mothers made. And too soon marrd are those so early made. The earth hath swallowd all my hopes but she She is the hopeful lady of my earth But woo her gentle Paris get her heart My will to her consent is but a part An she agree within her scope of choice Lies my consent and fair according voice. This night hold an old accustomd feast Whereto have invited many a guest Such as love and you among the store One more most welcome makes my number more. At my poor house look to behold this night Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light Such comfort as do lusty young men feel When well-apparelld April on the heel Of limping winter treads even such delight Among fresh female buds shall you this night Inherit at my house hear all all see And like her most whose merit most shall be Which on more view of many mine being one May stand in number though in reckoning none Come go with me. To Servant giving a paper Go sirrah trudge about Through fair Verona find those persons out Whose names are written there and to them say My house and welcome on their pleasure stay. Exeunt and Servant Find them out whose names are written here! It is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last the fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets but am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. must to the learned.--In good time. Enter and Tut man one fire burns out anothers burning One pain is lessend by anothers anguish Turn giddy and be holp by backward turning One desperate grief cures with anothers languish Take thou some new infection to thy eye And the rank poison of the old will die. Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that. For what pray thee? For your broken shin. Why Romeo art thou mad? Not mad but bound more than a mad-man is Shut up in prison kept without my food Whippd and tormented and--God-den good fellow. Servant God gi god-den. pray sir can you read? Ay mine own fortune in my misery. Servant Perhaps you have learned it without book but pray can you read any thing you see? Ay if know the letters and the language. Servant Ye say honestly rest you merry! Stay fellow can read. Reads Signior Martino and his wife and daughters County Anselme and his beauteous sisters the lady widow of Vitravio Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces Mercutio and his brother Valentine mine uncle Capulet his wife and daughters my fair niece Rosaline Livia Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt Lucio and the lively Helena. fair assembly whither should they come? Servant Up. Whither? Servant To supper to our house. Whose house? Servant My masters. Indeed should have askd you that before. Servant Now Ill tell you without asking my master is the great rich Capulet and if you be not of the house of Montagues pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit At this same ancient feast of Capulets Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest With all the admired beauties of Verona Go thither and with unattainted eye Compare her face with some that shall show And will make thee think thy swan a crow. When the devout religion of mine eye Maintains such falsehood then turn tears to fires And these who often drownd could never die Transparent heretics be burnt for liars! One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun Neer saw her match since first the world begun. Tut you saw her fair none else being by Herself poised with herself in either eye But in that crystal scales let there be weighd Your ladys love against some other maid That will show you shining at this feast And she shall scant show well that now shows best. Ill go along no such sight to be shown But to rejoice in splendor of mine own. Exeunt room in Capulets house. Enter and Nurse Nurse wheres my daughter? call her forth to me. Nurse Now by my maidenhead at twelve year old bade her come. What lamb! what ladybird! God forbid! Wheres this girl? What Juliet! Enter How now! who calls? Nurse Your mother. Madam am here. What is your will? This is the matter--Nurse give leave awhile We must talk in secret--nurse come back again have rememberd me thous hear our counsel. Thou knowst my daughters of a pretty age. Nurse Faith can tell her age unto an hour. Shes not fourteen. Nurse Ill lay fourteen of my teeth-- And yet to my teeth be it spoken have but four-- She is not fourteen. How long is it now To Lammas-tide? fortnight and odd days. Nurse Even or odd of all days in the year Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen. Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!-- Were of an age well Susan is with God She was too good for me but as said On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen That shall she marry remember it well. Tis since the earthquake now eleven years And she was weand--I never shall forget it-- Of all the days of the year upon that day For had then laid wormwood to my dug Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall My lord and you were then at Mantua-- Nay do bear a brain--but as said When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple Of my dug and felt it bitter pretty fool To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! Shake quoth the dove-house twas no need trow To bid me trudge And since that time it is eleven years For then she could stand alone nay by the rood She could have run and waddled all about For even the day before she broke her brow And then my husband--God be with his soul! was a merry man--took up the child Yea quoth he dost thou fall upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit Wilt thou not Jule? and by my holidame The pretty wretch left crying and said Ay. To see now how a jest shall come about! warrant an should live a thousand years never should forget it Wilt thou not Jule? quoth he And pretty fool it stinted and said Ay. Enough of this pray thee hold thy peace. Nurse Yes madam yet cannot choose but laugh To think it should leave crying and say Ay. And yet warrant it had upon its brow bump as big as a young cockerels stone parlous knock and it cried bitterly Yea quoth my husbandfallst upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age Wilt thou not Jule? it stinted and said Ay. And stint thou too pray thee nurse say Nurse Peace have done. God mark thee to his grace! Thou wast the prettiest babe that eer nursed An might live to see thee married once have my wish. Marry that marry is the very theme came to talk of. Tell me daughter Juliet How stands your disposition to be married? It is an honour that dream not of. Nurse An honour! were not thine only nurse would say thou hadst suckd wisdom from thy teat. Well think of marriage now younger than you Here in Verona ladies of esteem Are made already mothers by my count was your mother much upon these years That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief The valiant Paris seeks you for his love. Nurse man young lady! lady such a man As all the world--why hes a man of wax. Veronas summer hath not such a flower. Nurse Nay hes a flower in faith a very flower. What say you? can you love the gentleman? This night you shall behold him at our feast Read oer the volume of young Paris face And find delight writ there with beautys pen Examine every married lineament And see how one another lends content And what obscured in this fair volume lies Find written in the margent of his eyes. This precious book of love this unbound lover To beautify him only lacks a cover The fish lives in the sea and tis much pride For fair without the fair within to hide That book in manys eyes doth share the glory That in gold clasps locks in the golden story So shall you share all that he doth possess By having him making yourself no less. Nurse No less! nay bigger women grow by men. Speak briefly can you like of Paris love? Ill look to like if looking liking move But no more deep will endart mine eye Than your consent gives strength to make it fly. Enter a Servant Servant Madam the guests are come supper served up you called my young lady asked for the nurse cursed in the pantry and every thing in extremity. must hence to wait beseech you follow straight. We follow thee. Exit Servant Juliet the county stays. Nurse Go girl seek happy nights to happy days. Exeunt street. Enter with five or six Maskers Torch-bearers and others What shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? Or shall we on without a apology? The date is out of such prolixity Well have no Cupid hoodwinkd with a scarf Bearing a Tartars painted bow of lath Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper Nor no without-book prologue faintly spoke After the prompter for our entrance But let them measure us by what they will Well measure them a measure and be gone. Give me a torch am not for this ambling Being but heavy will bear the light. Nay gentle Romeo we must have you dance. Not believe me you have dancing shoes With nimble soles have a soul of lead So stakes me to the ground cannot move. You are a lover borrow Cupids wings And soar with them above a common bound. am too sore enpierced with his shaft To soar with his light feathers and so bound cannot bound a pitch above dull woe Under loves heavy burden do sink. And to sink in it should you burden love Too great oppression for a tender thing. Is love a tender thing? it is too rough Too rude too boisterous and it pricks like thorn. If love be rough with you be rough with love Prick love for pricking and you beat love down. Give me a case to put my visage in visor for a visor! what care What curious eye doth quote deformities? Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me. Come knock and enter and no sooner in But every man betake him to his legs. torch for me let wantons light of heart Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels For am proverbd with a grandsire phrase Ill be a candle-holder and look on. The game was neer so fair and am done. Tut duns the mouse the constables own word If thou art dun well draw thee from the mire Of this sir-reverence love wherein thou stickst Up to the ears. Come we burn daylight ho! Nay thats not so. mean sir in delay We waste our lights in vain like lamps by day. Take our good meaning for our judgment sits Five times in that ere once in our five wits. And we mean well in going to this mask But tis no wit to go. Why may one ask? dreamd a dream to-night. And so did Well what was yours? That dreamers often lie. In bed asleep while they do dream things true. then see Queen Mab hath been with you. She is the fairies midwife and she comes In shape no bigger than an agate-stone On the fore-finger of an alderman Drawn with a team of little atomies Athwart mens noses as they lie asleep Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders legs The cover of the wings of grasshoppers The traces of the smallest spiders web The collars of the moonshines watery beams Her whip of crickets bone the lash of film Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat Not so big as a round little worm Prickd from the lazy finger of a maid Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub Time out o mind the fairies coachmakers. And in this state she gallops night by night Through lovers brains and then they dream of love Oer courtiers knees that dream on courtsies straight Oer lawyers fingers who straight dream on fees Oer ladies lips who straight on kisses dream Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are Sometime she gallops oer a courtiers nose And then dreams he of smelling out a suit And sometime comes she with a tithe-pigs tail Tickling a parsons nose as a lies asleep Then dreams he of another benefice Sometime she driveth oer a soldiers neck And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats Of breaches ambuscadoes Spanish blades Of healths five-fathom deep and then anon Drums in his ear at which he starts and wakes And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two And sleeps again. This is that very Mab That plats the manes of horses in the night And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs Which once untangled much misfortune bodes This is the hag when maids lie on their backs That presses them and learns them first to bear Making them women of good carriage This is she-- Peace peace Mercutio peace! Thou talkst of nothing. True talk of dreams Which are the children of an idle brain Begot of nothing but vain fantasy Which is as thin of substance as the air And more inconstant than the wind who wooes Even now the frozen bosom of the north And being angerd puffs away from thence Turning his face to the dew-dropping south. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves Supper is done and we shall come too late. fear too early for my mind misgives Some consequence yet hanging in the stars Shall bitterly begin his fearful date With this nights revels and expire the term Of a despised life closed in my breast By some vile forfeit of untimely death. But He that hath the steerage of my course Direct my sail! On lusty gentlemen. Strike drum. Exeunt hall in Capulets house. Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins First Servant Wheres Potpan that he helps not to take away? He shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher! Second Servant When good manners shall lie all in one or two mens hands and they unwashed too tis a foul thing. First Servant Away with the joint-stools remove the court-cupboard look to the plate. Good thou save me a piece of marchpane and as thou lovest me let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan! Second Servant Ay boy ready. First Servant You are looked for and called for asked for and sought for in the great chamber. Second Servant We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly boys be brisk awhile and the longer liver take all. Enter with and others of his house meeting the Guests and Maskers Welcome gentlemen! ladies that have their toes Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you. Ah ha my mistresses! which of you all Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty She Ill swear hath corns am come near ye now? Welcome gentlemen! have seen the day That have worn a visor and could tell whispering tale in a fair ladys ear Such as would please tis gone tis gone tis gone You are welcome gentlemen! come musicians play. hall a hall! give room! and foot it girls. Music plays and they dance More light you knaves and turn the tables up And quench the fire the room is grown too hot. Ah sirrah this unlookd-for sport comes well. Nay sit nay sit good cousin Capulet For you and are past our dancing days How long ist now since last yourself and Were in a mask? Second Capulet Byr lady thirty years. What man! tis not so much tis not so much Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio Come pentecost as quickly as it will Some five and twenty years and then we maskd. Second Capulet Tis more tis more his son is elder sir His son is thirty. Will you tell me that? His son was but a ward two years ago. To a Servingman What lady is that which doth enrich the hand Of yonder knight? Servant know not sir. she doth teach the torches to burn bright! It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night Like a rich jewel in an Ethiopes ear Beauty too rich for use for earth too dear! So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows As yonder lady oer her fellows shows. The measure done Ill watch her place of stand And touching hers make blessed my rude hand. Did my heart love till now? forswear it sight! For neer saw true beauty till this night. This by his voice should be a Montague. Fetch me my rapier boy. What dares the slave Come hither coverd with an antic face To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? Now by the stock and honour of my kin To strike him dead hold it not a sin. Why how now kinsman! wherefore storm you so? Uncle this is a Montague our foe villain that is hither come in spite To scorn at our solemnity this night. Young Romeo is it? Tis he that villain Romeo. Content thee gentle coz let him alone He bears him like a portly gentleman And to say truth Verona brags of him To be a virtuous and well-governd youth would not for the wealth of all the town Here in my house do him disparagement Therefore be patient take no note of him It is my will the which if thou respect Show a fair presence and put off these frowns And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast. It fits when such a villain is a guest Ill not endure him. He shall be endured What goodman boy! say he shall go to Am the master here or you? go to. Youll not endure him! God shall mend my soul! Youll make a mutiny among my guests! You will set cock-a-hoop! youll be the man! Why uncle tis a shame. Go to go to You are a saucy boy ist so indeed? This trick may chance to scathe you know what You must contrary me! marry tis time. Well said my hearts! You are a princox go Be quiet or--More light more light! For shame! Ill make you quiet. What cheerly my hearts! Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. will withdraw but this intrusion shall Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall. Exit To If profane with my unworthiest hand This holy shrine the gentle fine is this My lips two blushing pilgrims ready stand To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss. Good pilgrim you do wrong your hand too much Which mannerly devotion shows in this For saints have hands that pilgrims hands do touch And palm to palm is holy palmers kiss. Have not saints lips and holy palmers too? Ay pilgrim lips that they must use in prayer. then dear saint let lips do what hands do They pray grant thou lest faith turn to despair. Saints do not move though grant for prayers sake. Then move not while my prayers effect take. Thus from my lips by yours my sin is purged. Then have my lips the sin that they have took. Sin from thy lips? trespass sweetly urged! Give me my sin again. You kiss by the book. Nurse Madam your mother craves a word with you. What is her mother? Nurse Marry bachelor Her mother is the lady of the house And a good lady and a wise and virtuous nursed her daughter that you talkd withal tell you he that can lay hold of her Shall have the chinks. Is she a Capulet? dear account! my life is my foes debt. Away begone the sport is at the best. Ay so fear the more is my unrest. Nay gentlemen prepare not to be gone We have a trifling foolish banquet towards. Is it een so? why then thank you all thank you honest gentlemen good night. More torches here! Come on then lets to bed. Ah sirrah by my fay it waxes late Ill to my rest. Exeunt all but and Nurse Come hither nurse. What is yond gentleman? Nurse The son and heir of old Tiberio. Whats he that now is going out of door? Nurse Marry that think be young Petrucio. Whats he that follows there that would not dance? Nurse know not. Go ask his name if he be married. My grave is like to be my wedding bed. Nurse His name is Romeo and a Montague The only son of your great enemy. My only love sprung from my only hate! Too early seen unknown and known too late! Prodigious birth of love it is to me That must love a loathed enemy. Nurse Whats this? whats this? rhyme learnd even now Of one danced withal. One calls within Juliet. Nurse Anon anon! Come lets away the strangers all are gone. Exeunt Enter Chorus Chorus Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie And young affection gapes to be his heir That fair for which love groand for and would die With tender Juliet matchd is now not fair. Now Romeo is beloved and loves again Alike betwitched by the charm of looks But to his foe supposed he must complain And she steal loves sweet bait from fearful hooks Being held a foe he may not have access To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear And she as much in love her means much less To meet her new-beloved any where But passion lends them power time means to meet Tempering extremities with extreme sweet. Exit lane by the wall of Capulets orchard. Enter Can go forward when my heart is here? Turn back dull earth and find thy centre out. He climbs the wall and leaps down within it Enter and Romeo! my cousin Romeo! He is wise And on my lie hath stoln him home to bed. He ran this way and leapd this orchard wall Call good Mercutio. Nay Ill conjure too. Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover! Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh Speak but one rhyme and am satisfied Cry but Ay me! pronounce but love and dove Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word One nick-name for her purblind son and heir Young Adam Cupid he that shot so trim When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid! He heareth not he stirreth not he moveth not The ape is dead and must conjure him. conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes By her high forehead and her scarlet lip By her fine foot straight leg and quivering thigh And the demesnes that there adjacent lie That in thy likeness thou appear to us! And if he hear thee thou wilt anger him. This cannot anger him twould anger him To raise a spirit in his mistress circle Of some strange nature letting it there stand Till she had laid it and conjured it down That were some spite my invocation Is fair and honest and in his mistress name conjure only but to raise up him. Come he hath hid himself among these trees To be consorted with the humorous night Blind is his love and best befits the dark. If love be blind love cannot hit the mark. Now will he sit under a medlar tree And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit As maids call medlars when they laugh alone. Romeo that she were that she were An open et caetera thou a poperin pear! Romeo good night Ill to my truckle-bed This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep Come shall we go? Go then for tis in vain To seek him here that means not to be found. Exeunt Capulets orchard. Enter He jests at scars that never felt a wound. appears above at a window But soft! what light through yonder window breaks? It is the east and Juliet is the sun. Arise fair sun and kill the envious moon Who is already sick and pale with grief That thou her maid art far more fair than she Be not her maid since she is envious Her vestal livery is but sick and green And none but fools do wear it cast it off. It is my lady it is my love! that she knew she were! She speaks yet she says nothing what of that? Her eye discourses will answer it. am too bold tis not to me she speaks Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven Having some business do entreat her eyes To twinkle in their spheres till they return. What if her eyes were there they in her head? The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars As daylight doth a lamp her eyes in heaven Would through the airy region stream so bright That birds would sing and think it were not night. See how she leans her cheek upon her hand! that were a glove upon that hand That might touch that cheek! Ay me! She speaks speak again bright angel! for thou art As glorious to this night being oer my head As is a winged messenger of heaven Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds And sails upon the bosom of the air. Romeo Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo? Deny thy father and refuse thy name Or if thou wilt not be but sworn my love And Ill no longer be a Capulet. Aside Shall hear more or shall speak at this? Tis but thy name that is my enemy Thou art thyself though not a Montague. Whats Montague? it is nor hand nor foot Nor arm nor face nor any other part Belonging to a man. be some other name! Whats in a name? that which we call a rose By any other name would smell as sweet So Romeo would were he not Romeo calld Retain that dear perfection which he owes Without that title. Romeo doff thy name And for that name which is no part of thee Take all myself. take thee at thy word Call me but love and Ill be new baptized Henceforth never will be Romeo. What man art thou that thus bescreend in night So stumblest on my counsel? By a name know not how to tell thee who am My name dear saint is hateful to myself Because it is an enemy to thee Had it written would tear the word. My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words Of that tongues utterance yet know the sound Art thou not Romeo and a Montague? Neither fair saint if either thee dislike. How camest thou hither tell me and wherefore? The orchard walls are high and hard to climb And the place death considering who thou art If any of my kinsmen find thee here. With loves light wings did oer-perch these walls For stony limits cannot hold love out And what love can do that dares love attempt Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me. If they do see thee they will murder thee. Alack there lies more peril in thine eye Than twenty of their swords look thou but sweet And am proof against their enmity. would not for the world they saw thee here. have nights cloak to hide me from their sight And but thou love me let them find me here My life were better ended by their hate Than death prorogued wanting of thy love. By whose direction foundst thou out this place? By love who first did prompt me to inquire He lent me counsel and lent him eyes. am no pilot yet wert thou as far As that vast shore washd with the farthest sea would adventure for such merchandise. Thou knowst the mask of night is on my face Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night Fain would dwell on form fain fain deny What have spoke but farewell compliment! Dost thou love me? know thou wilt say Ay And will take thy word yet if thou swearst Thou mayst prove false at lovers perjuries Then say Jove laughs. gentle Romeo If thou dost love pronounce it faithfully Or if thou thinkst am too quickly won Ill frown and be perverse an say thee nay So thou wilt woo but else not for the world. In truth fair Montague am too fond And therefore thou mayst think my havior light But trust me gentleman Ill prove more true Than those that have more cunning to be strange. should have been more strange must confess But that thou overheardst ere was ware My true loves passion therefore pardon me And not impute this yielding to light love Which the dark night hath so discovered. Lady by yonder blessed moon swear That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-- swear not by the moon the inconstant moon That monthly changes in her circled orb Lest that thy love prove likewise variable. What shall swear by? Do not swear at all Or if thou wilt swear by thy gracious self Which is the god of my idolatry And Ill believe thee. If my hearts dear love-- Well do not swear although joy in thee have no joy of this contract to-night It is too rash too unadvised too sudden Too like the lightning which doth cease to be Ere one can say It lightens. Sweet good night! This bud of love by summers ripening breath May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. Good night good night! as sweet repose and rest Come to thy heart as that within my breast! wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied? What satisfaction canst thou have to-night? The exchange of thy loves faithful vow for mine. gave thee mine before thou didst request it And yet would it were to give again. Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose love? But to be frank and give it thee again. And yet wish but for the thing have My bounty is as boundless as the sea My love as deep the more give to thee The more have for both are infinite. Nurse calls within hear some noise within dear love adieu! Anon good nurse! Sweet Montague be true. Stay but a little will come again. Exit above blessed blessed night! am afeard. Being in night all this is but a dream Too flattering-sweet to be substantial. Re-enter above Three words dear Romeo and good night indeed. If that thy bent of love be honourable Thy purpose marriage send me word to-morrow By one that Ill procure to come to thee Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite And all my fortunes at thy foot Ill lay And follow thee my lord throughout the world. Nurse Within Madam! come anon.--But if thou meanst not well do beseech thee-- Nurse Within Madam! By and by come-- To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief To-morrow will send. So thrive my soul-- thousand times good night! Exit above thousand times the worse to want thy light. Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books But love from love toward school with heavy looks. Retiring Re-enter above Hist! Romeo hist! for a falconers voice To lure this tassel-gentle back again! Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud Else would tear the cave where Echo lies And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine With repetition of my Romeos name. It is my soul that calls upon my name How silver-sweet sound lovers tongues by night Like softest music to attending ears! Romeo! My dear? At what oclock to-morrow Shall send to thee? At the hour of nine. will not fail tis twenty years till then. have forgot why did call thee back. Let me stand here till thou remember it. shall forget to have thee still stand there Remembering how love thy company. And Ill still stay to have thee still forget Forgetting any other home but this. Tis almost morning would have thee gone And yet no further than a wantons bird Who lets it hop a little from her hand Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves And with a silk thread plucks it back again So loving-jealous of his liberty. would were thy bird. Sweet so would Yet should kill thee with much cherishing. Good night good night! parting is such sweet sorrow That shall say good night till it be morrow. Exit above Sleep dwell upon thine eyes peace in thy breast! Would were sleep and peace so sweet to rest! Hence will to my ghostly fathers cell His help to crave and my dear hap to tell. Exit Friar Laurences cell. Enter with a basket The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels From forth days path and Titans fiery wheels Now ere the sun advance his burning eye The day to cheer and nights dank dew to dry must up-fill this osier cage of ours With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers. The earth thats natures mother is her tomb What is her burying grave that is her womb And from her womb children of divers kind We sucking on her natural bosom find Many for many virtues excellent None but for some and yet all different. mickle is the powerful grace that lies In herbs plants stones and their true qualities For nought so vile that on the earth doth live But to the earth some special good doth give Nor aught so good but straind from that fair use Revolts from true birth stumbling on abuse Virtue itself turns vice being misapplied And vice sometimes by action dignified. Within the infant rind of this small flower Poison hath residence and medicine power For this being smelt with that part cheers each part Being tasted slays all senses with the heart. Two such opposed kings encamp them still In man as well as herbs grace and rude will And where the worser is predominant Full soon the canker death eats up that plant. Enter Good morrow father. Benedicite! What early tongue so sweet saluteth me? Young son it argues a distemperd head So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed Care keeps his watch in every old mans eye And where care lodges sleep will never lie But where unbruised youth with unstuffd brain Doth couch his limbs there golden sleep doth reign Therefore thy earliness doth me assure Thou art up-roused by some distemperature Or if not so then here hit it right Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night. That last is true the sweeter rest was mine. God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline? With Rosaline my ghostly father? no have forgot that name and that names woe. Thats my good son but where hast thou been then? Ill tell thee ere thou ask it me again. have been feasting with mine enemy Where on a sudden one hath wounded me Thats by me wounded both our remedies Within thy help and holy physic lies bear no hatred blessed man for lo My intercession likewise steads my foe. Be plain good son and homely in thy drift Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift. Then plainly know my hearts dear love is set On the fair daughter of rich Capulet As mine on hers so hers is set on mine And all combined save what thou must combine By holy marriage when and where and how We met we wood and made exchange of vow Ill tell thee as we pass but this pray That thou consent to marry us to-day. Holy Saint Francis what a change is here! Is Rosaline whom thou didst love so dear So soon forsaken? young mens love then lies Not truly in their hearts but in their eyes. Jesu Maria what a deal of brine Hath washd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline! How much salt water thrown away in waste To season love that of it doth not taste! The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears Lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit Of an old tear that is not washd off yet If eer thou wast thyself and these woes thine Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then Women may fall when theres no strength in men. Thou chidst me oft for loving Rosaline. For doting not for loving pupil mine. And badst me bury love. Not in a grave To lay one in another out to have. pray thee chide not she whom love now Doth grace for grace and love for love allow The other did not so. she knew well Thy love did read by rote and could not spell. But come young waverer come go with me In one respect Ill thy assistant be For this alliance may so happy prove To turn your households rancour to pure love. let us hence stand on sudden haste. Wisely and slow they stumble that run fast. Exeunt street. Enter and Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home to-night? Not to his fathers spoke with his man. Ah that same pale hard-hearted wench that Rosaline. Torments him so that he will sure run mad. Tybalt the kinsman of old Capulet Hath sent a letter to his fathers house. challenge on my life. Romeo will answer it. Any man that can write may answer a letter. Nay he will answer the letters master how he dares being dared. Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead stabbed with a white wenchs black eye shot through the ear with a love-song the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boys butt-shaft and is he a man to encounter Tybalt? Why what is Tybalt? More than prince of cats can tell you. he is the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song keeps time distance and proportion rests me his minim rest one two and the third in your bosom the very butcher of a silk button a duellist a duellist a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause ah the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the hai! The what? The pox of such antic lisping affecting fantasticoes these new tuners of accents! By Jesu a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good whore! Why is not this a lamentable thing grandsire that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies these fashion-mongers these perdona-mis who stand so much on the new form that they cannot at ease on the old bench? their bones their bones! Enter Here comes Romeo here comes Romeo. Without his roe like a dried herring flesh flesh how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in Laura to his lady was but a kitchen-wench marry she had a better love to be-rhyme her Dido a dowdy Cleopatra a gipsy Helen and Hero hildings and harlots Thisbe a grey eye or so but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo bon jour! theres a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did give you? The ship sir the slip can you not conceive? Pardon good Mercutio my business was great and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy. Thats as much as to say such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams. Meaning to courtsy. Thou hast most kindly hit it. most courteous exposition. Nay am the very pink of courtesy. Pink for flower. Right. Why then is my pump well flowered. Well said follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump that when the single sole of it is worn the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular. single-soled jest solely singular for the singleness. Come between us good Benvolio my wits faint. Switch and spurs switch and spurs or Ill cry a match. Nay if thy wits run the wild-goose chase have done for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than am sure have in my whole five was with you there for the goose? Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast not there for the goose. will bite thee by the ear for that jest. Nay good goose bite not. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting it is a most sharp sauce. And is it not well served in to a sweet goose? heres a wit of cheveril that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad! stretch it out for that word broad which added to the goose proves thee far and wide a broad goose. Why is not this better now than groaning for love? now art thou sociable now art thou Romeo now art thou what thou art by art as well as by nature for this drivelling love is like a great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole. Stop there stop there. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large. thou art deceived would have made it short for was come to the whole depth of my tale and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer. Heres goodly gear! Enter Nurse and sail a sail! Two two a shirt and a smock. Nurse Peter! Anon! Nurse My fan Peter. Good Peter to hide her face for her fans the fairer face. Nurse God ye good morrow gentlemen. God ye good den fair gentlewoman. Nurse Is it good den? Tis no less tell you for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon. Nurse Out upon you! what a man are you! One gentlewoman that God hath made for himself to mar. Nurse By my troth it is well said for himself to mar quoth a? Gentlemen can any of you tell me where may find the young Romeo? can tell you but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him am the youngest of that name for fault of a worse. Nurse You say well. Yea is the worst well? very well took i faith wisely wisely. Nurse if you be he sir desire some confidence with you. She will indite him to some supper. bawd a bawd a bawd! so ho! What hast thou found? No hare sir unless a hare sir in a lenten pie that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent. Sings An old hare hoar And an old hare hoar Is very good meat in lent But a hare that is hoar Is too much for a score When it hoars ere it be spent. Romeo will you come to your fathers? well to dinner thither. will follow you. Farewell ancient lady farewell Singing lady lady lady. Exeunt and Nurse Marry farewell! pray you sir what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery? gentleman nurse that loves to hear himself talk and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month. Nurse An a speak any thing against me Ill take him down an a were lustier than he is and twenty such Jacks and if cannot Ill find those that shall. Scurvy knave! am none of his flirt-gills am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure? saw no man use you a pleasure if had my weapon should quickly have been out warrant you dare draw as soon as another man if see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side. Nurse Now afore God am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you sir a word and as told you my young lady bade me inquire you out what she bade me say will keep to myself but first let me tell ye if ye should lead her into a fools paradise as they say it were a very gross kind of behavior as they say for the gentlewoman is young and therefore if you should deal double with her truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman and very weak dealing. Nurse commend me to thy lady and mistress. protest unto thee-- Nurse Good heart and i faith will tell her as much Lord Lord she will be a joyful woman. What wilt thou tell her nurse? thou dost not mark me. Nurse will tell her sir that you do protest which as take it is a gentlemanlike offer. Bid her devise Some means to come to shrift this afternoon And there she shall at Friar Laurence cell Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains. Nurse No truly sir not a penny. Go to say you shall. Nurse This afternoon sir? well she shall be there. And stay good nurse behind the abbey wall Within this hour my man shall be with thee And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair Which to the high top-gallant of my joy Must be my convoy in the secret night. Farewell be trusty and Ill quit thy pains Farewell commend me to thy mistress. Nurse Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you sir. What sayst thou my dear nurse? Nurse Is your man secret? Did you neer hear say Two may keep counsel putting one away? warrant thee my mans as true as steel. Well sir my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord Lord! when twas a little prating thing--O there is a nobleman in town one Paris that would fain lay knife aboard but she good soul had as lief see a toad a very toad as see him. anger her sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer man but Ill warrant you when say so she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter? Ay nurse what of that? both with an Nurse Ah. mocker! thats the dogs name is for the--No know it begins with some other letter--and she hath the prettiest sententious of it of you and rosemary that it would do you good to hear it. Commend me to thy lady. Nurse Ay a thousand times. Exit Romeo Peter! Anon! Nurse Peter take my fan and go before and apace. Exeunt Capulets orchard. Enter The clock struck nine when did send the nurse In half an hour she promised to return. Perchance she cannot meet him thats not so. she is lame! loves heralds should be thoughts Which ten times faster glide than the suns beams Driving back shadows over louring hills Therefore do nimble-piniond doves draw love And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings. Now is the sun upon the highmost hill Of this days journey and from nine till twelve Is three long hours yet she is not come. Had she affections and warm youthful blood She would be as swift in motion as a ball My words would bandy her to my sweet love And his to me But old folks many feign as they were dead Unwieldy slow heavy and pale as lead. God she comes! Enter Nurse and honey nurse what news? Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away. Nurse Peter stay at the gate. Exit Now good sweet nurse--O Lord why lookst thou sad? Though news be sad yet tell them merrily If good thou shamest the music of sweet news By playing it to me with so sour a face. Nurse am a-weary give me leave awhile Fie how my bones ache! what a jaunt have had! would thou hadst my bones and thy news Nay come pray thee speak good good nurse speak. Nurse Jesu what haste? can you not stay awhile? Do you not see that am out of breath? How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath To say to me that thou art out of breath? The excuse that thou dost make in this delay Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. Is thy news good or bad? answer to that Say either and Ill stay the circumstance Let me be satisfied ist good or bad? Nurse Well you have made a simple choice you know not how to choose a man Romeo! no not he though his face be better than any mans yet his leg excels all mens and for a hand and a foot and a body though they be not to be talked on yet they are past compare he is not the flower of courtesy but Ill warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways wench serve God. What have you dined at home? No no but all this did know before. What says he of our marriage? what of that? Nurse Lord how my head aches! what a head have It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. My back o t other side--O my back my back! Beshrew your heart for sending me about To catch my death with jaunting up and down! faith am sorry that thou art not well. Sweet sweet sweet nurse tell me what says my love? Nurse Your love says like an honest gentleman and a courteous and a kind and a handsome and warrant a virtuous--Where is your mother? Where is my mother! why she is within Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest! Your love says like an honest gentleman Where is your mother? Nurse Gods lady dear! Are you so hot? marry come up trow Is this the poultice for my aching bones? Henceforward do your messages yourself. Heres such a coil! come what says Romeo? Nurse Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day? have. Nurse Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence cell There stays a husband to make you a wife Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks Theyll be in scarlet straight at any news. Hie you to church must another way To fetch a ladder by the which your love Must climb a birds nest soon when it is dark am the drudge and toil in your delight But you shall bear the burden soon at night. Go Ill to dinner hie you to the cell. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse farewell. Exeunt Friar Laurences cell. Enter and So smile the heavens upon this holy act That after hours with sorrow chide us not! Amen amen! but come what sorrow can It cannot countervail the exchange of joy That one short minute gives me in her sight Do thou but close our hands with holy words Then love-devouring death do what he dare It is enough may but call her mine. These violent delights have violent ends And in their triumph die like fire and powder Which as they kiss consume the sweetest honey Is loathsome in his own deliciousness And in the taste confounds the appetite Therefore love moderately long love doth so Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow. Enter Here comes the lady so light a foot Will neer wear out the everlasting flint lover may bestride the gossamer That idles in the wanton summer air And yet not fall so light is vanity. Good even to my ghostly confessor. Romeo shall thank thee daughter for us both. As much to him else is his thanks too much. Ah Juliet if the measure of thy joy Be heapd like mine and that thy skill be more To blazon it then sweeten with thy breath This neighbour air and let rich musics tongue Unfold the imagined happiness that both Receive in either by this dear encounter. Conceit more rich in matter than in words Brags of his substance not of ornament They are but beggars that can count their worth But my true love is grown to such excess cannot sum up sum of half my wealth. Come come with me and we will make short work For by your leaves you shall not stay alone Till holy church incorporate two in one. Exeunt public place. Enter Page and Servants pray thee good Mercutio lets retire The day is hot the Capulets abroad And if we meet we shall not scape a brawl For now these hot days is the mad blood stirring. Thou art like one of those fellows that when he enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword upon the table and says God send me no need of thee! and by the operation of the second cup draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need. Am like such a fellow? Come come thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy and as soon moved to be moody and as soon moody to be moved. And what to? Nay an there were two such we should have none shortly for one would kill the other. Thou! why thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes what eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of meat and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling thou hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? with another for tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling! An were so apt to quarrel as thou art any man should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter. The fee-simple! simple! By my head here come the Capulets. By my heel care not. Enter and others Follow me close for will speak to them. Gentlemen good den a word with one of you. And but one word with one of us? couple it with something make it a word and a blow. You shall find me apt enough to that sir an you will give me occasion. Could you not take some occasion without giving? Mercutio thou consortst with Romeo-- Consort! what dost thou make us minstrels? an thou make minstrels of us look to hear nothing but discords heres my fiddlestick heres that shall make you dance. Zounds consort! We talk here in the public haunt of men Either withdraw unto some private place And reason coldly of your grievances Or else depart here all eyes gaze on us. Mens eyes were made to look and let them gaze will not budge for no mans pleasure Enter Well peace be with you sir here comes my man. But Ill be hanged sir if he wear your livery Marry go before to field hell be your follower Your worship in that sense may call him man. Romeo the hate bear thee can afford No better term than this--thou art a villain. Tybalt the reason that have to love thee Doth much excuse the appertaining rage To such a greeting villain am none Therefore farewell see thou knowst me not. Boy this shall not excuse the injuries That thou hast done me therefore turn and draw. do protest never injured thee But love thee better than thou canst devise Till thou shalt know the reason of my love And so good Capulet--which name tender As dearly as my own--be satisfied. calm dishonourable vile submission! Alla stoccata carries it away. Draws Tybalt you rat-catcher will you walk? What wouldst thou have with me? Good king of cats nothing but one of your nine lives that mean to make bold withal and as you shall use me hereafter drybeat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher by the ears? make haste lest mine be about your ears ere it be out. am for you. Drawing Gentle Mercutio put thy rapier up. Come sir your passado. They fight Draw Benvolio beat down their weapons. Gentlemen for shame forbear this outrage! Tybalt Mercutio the prince expressly hath Forbidden bandying in Verona streets Hold Tybalt! good Mercutio! under ROMEOs arm stabs and flies with his followers am hurt. plague o both your houses! am sped. Is he gone and hath nothing? What art thou hurt? Ay ay a scratch a scratch marry tis enough. Where is my page? Go villain fetch a surgeon. Exit Page Courage man the hurt cannot be much. No tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a church-door but tis enoughtwill serve ask for me to-morrow and you shall find me a grave man. am peppered warrant for this world. plague o both your houses! Zounds a dog a rat a mouse a cat to scratch a man to death! a braggart a rogue a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? was hurt under your arm. thought all for the best. Help me into some house Benvolio Or shall faint. plague o both your houses! They have made worms meat of me have it And soundly too your houses! Exeunt and This gentleman the princes near ally My very friend hath got his mortal hurt In my behalf my reputation staind With Tybalts slander--Tybalt that an hour Hath been my kinsman! sweet Juliet Thy beauty hath made me effeminate And in my temper softend valours steel! Re-enter Romeo Romeo brave Mercutios dead! That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds Which too untimely here did scorn the earth. This days black fate on more days doth depend This but begins the woe others must end. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again. Alive in triumph! and Mercutio slain! Away to heaven respective lenity And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now! Re-enter Now Tybalt take the villain back again That late thou gavest me for Mercutios soul Is but a little way above our heads Staying for thine to keep him company Either thou or or both must go with him. Thou wretched boy that didst consort him here Shalt with him hence. This shall determine that. They fight falls Romeo away be gone! The citizens are up and Tybalt slain. Stand not amazed the prince will doom thee death If thou art taken hence be gone away! am fortunes fool! Why dost thou stay? Exit Enter Citizens c First Citizen Which way ran he that killd Mercutio? Tybalt that murderer which way ran he? There lies that Tybalt. First Citizen Up sir go with me charge thee in the princes name obey. Enter Prince attended their Wives and others Where are the vile beginners of this fray? noble prince can discover all The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl There lies the man slain by young Romeo That slew thy kinsman brave Mercutio. Tybalt my cousin! my brothers child! prince! cousin! husband! the blood is spilt my dear kinsman! Prince as thou art true For blood of ours shed blood of Montague. cousin cousin! Benvolio who began this bloody fray? Tybalt here slain whom Romeos hand did slay Romeo that spoke him fair bade him bethink How nice the quarrel was and urged withal Your high displeasure all this uttered With gentle breath calm look knees humbly bowd Could not take truce with the unruly spleen Of Tybalt deaf to peace but that he tilts With piercing steel at bold Mercutios breast Who all as hot turns deadly point to point And with a martial scorn with one hand beats Cold death aside and with the other sends It back to Tybalt whose dexterity Retorts it Romeo he cries aloud Hold friends! friends part! and swifter than his tongue His agile arm beats down their fatal points And twixt them rushes underneath whose arm An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life Of stout Mercutio and then Tybalt fled But by and by comes back to Romeo Who had but newly entertaind revenge And to t they go like lightning for ere Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain. And as he fell did Romeo turn and fly. This is the truth or let Benvolio die. He is a kinsman to the Montague Affection makes him false he speaks not true Some twenty of them fought in this black strife And all those twenty could but kill one life. beg for justice which thou prince must give Romeo slew Tybalt Romeo must not live. Romeo slew him he slew Mercutio Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe? Not Romeo prince he was Mercutios friend His fault concludes but what the law should end The life of Tybalt. And for that offence Immediately we do exile him hence have an interest in your hates proceeding My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding But Ill amerce you with so strong a fine That you shall all repent the loss of mine will be deaf to pleading and excuses Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses Therefore use none let Romeo hence in haste Else when hes found that hour is his last. Bear hence this body and attend our will Mercy but murders pardoning those that kill. Exeunt Capulets orchard. Enter Gallop apace you fiery-footed steeds Towards Phoebus lodging such a wagoner As Phaethon would whip you to the west And bring in cloudy night immediately. Spread thy close curtain love-performing night That runaways eyes may wink and Romeo Leap to these arms untalkd of and unseen. Lovers can see to do their amorous rites By their own beauties or if love be blind It best agrees with night. Come civil night Thou sober-suited matron all in black And learn me how to lose a winning match Playd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods Hood my unmannd blood bating in my cheeks With thy black mantle till strange love grown bold Think true love acted simple modesty. Come night come Romeo come thou day in night For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night Whiter than new snow on a ravens back. Come gentle night come loving black-browd night Give me my Romeo and when he shall die Take him and cut him out in little stars And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night And pay no worship to the garish sun. have bought the mansion of a love But not possessd it and though am sold Not yet enjoyd so tedious is this day As is the night before some festival To an impatient child that hath new robes And may not wear them. here comes my nurse And she brings news and every tongue that speaks But Romeos name speaks heavenly eloquence. Enter Nurse with cords Now nurse what news? What hast thou there? the cords That Romeo bid thee fetch? Nurse Ay ay the cords. Throws them down Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands? Nurse Ah well-a-day! hes dead hes dead hes dead! We are undone lady we are undone! Alack the day! hes gone hes killd hes dead! Can heaven be so envious? Nurse Romeo can Though heaven cannot Romeo Romeo! Who ever would have thought it? Romeo! What devil art thou that dost torment me thus? This torture should be roard in dismal hell. Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but And that bare vowel shall poison more Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice am not if there be such an Or those eyes shut that make thee answer If he be slain say or if not no Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe. Nurse saw the wound saw it with mine eyes-- God save the mark!--here on his manly breast piteous corse a bloody piteous corse Pale pale as ashes all bedaubd in blood All in gore-blood swounded at the sight. break my heart! poor bankrupt break at once! To prison eyes neer look on liberty! Vile earth to earth resign end motion here And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier! Nurse Tybalt Tybalt the best friend had! courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman! That ever should live to see thee dead! What storm is this that blows so contrary? Is Romeo slaughterd and is Tybalt dead? My dear-loved cousin and my dearer lord? Then dreadful trumpet sound the general doom! For who is living if those two are gone? Nurse Tybalt is gone and Romeo banished Romeo that killd him he is banished. God! did Romeos hand shed Tybalts blood? Nurse It did it did alas the day it did! serpent heart hid with a flowering face! Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave? Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical! Dove-featherd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb! Despised substance of divinest show! Just opposite to what thou justly seemst damned saint an honourable villain! nature what hadst thou to do in hell When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend In moral paradise of such sweet flesh? Was ever book containing such vile matter So fairly bound? that deceit should dwell In such a gorgeous palace! Nurse Theres no trust No faith no honesty in men all perjured All forsworn all naught all dissemblers. Ah wheres my man? give me some aqua vitae These griefs these woes these sorrows make me old. Shame come to Romeo! Blisterd be thy tongue For such a wish! he was not born to shame Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit For tis a throne where honour may be crownd Sole monarch of the universal earth. what a beast was to chide at him! Nurse Will you speak well of him that killd your cousin? Shall speak ill of him that is my husband? Ah poor my lord what tongue shall smooth thy name When thy three-hours wife have mangled it? But wherefore villain didst thou kill my cousin? That villain cousin would have killd my husband Back foolish tears back to your native spring Your tributary drops belong to woe Which you mistaking offer up to joy. My husband lives that Tybalt would have slain And Tybalts dead that would have slain my husband All this is comfort wherefore weep then? Some word there was worser than Tybalts death That murderd me would forget it fain But it presses to my memory Like damned guilty deeds to sinners minds Tybalt is dead and Romeo--banished That banished that one word banished Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalts death Was woe enough if it had ended there Or if sour woe delights in fellowship And needly will be rankd with other griefs Why followd not when she said Tybalts dead Thy father or thy mother nay or both Which modern lamentations might have moved? But with a rear-ward following Tybalts death Romeo is banished to speak that word Is father mother Tybalt Romeo Juliet All slain all dead. Romeo is banished! There is no end no limit measure bound In that words death no words can that woe sound. Where is my father and my mother nurse? Nurse Weeping and wailing over Tybalts corse Will you go to them? will bring you thither. Wash they his wounds with tears mine shall be spent When theirs are dry for Romeos banishment. Take up those cords poor ropes you are beguiled Both you and for Romeo is exiled He made you for a highway to my bed But a maid die maiden-widowed. Come cords come nurse Ill to my wedding-bed And death not Romeo take my maidenhead! Nurse Hie to your chamber Ill find Romeo To comfort you wot well where he is. Hark ye your Romeo will be here at night Ill to him he is hid at Laurence cell. find him! give this ring to my true knight And bid him come to take his last farewell. Exeunt Friar Laurences cell. Enter Romeo come forth come forth thou fearful man Affliction is enamourd of thy parts And thou art wedded to calamity. Enter Father what news? what is the princes doom? What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand That yet know not? Too familiar Is my dear son with such sour company bring thee tidings of the princes doom. What less than dooms-day is the princes doom? gentler judgment vanishd from his lips Not bodys death but bodys banishment. Ha banishment! be merciful say death For exile hath more terror in his look Much more than death do not say banishment. Hence from Verona art thou banished Be patient for the world is broad and wide. There is no world without Verona walls But purgatory torture hell itself. Hence-banished is banishd from the world And worlds exile is death then banished Is death mis-termd calling death banishment Thou cuttst my head off with a golden axe And smilest upon the stroke that murders me. deadly sin! rude unthankfulness! Thy fault our law calls death but the kind prince Taking thy part hath rushd aside the law And turnd that black word death to banishment This is dear mercy and thou seest it not. Tis torture and not mercy heaven is here Where Juliet lives and every cat and dog And little mouse every unworthy thing Live here in heaven and may look on her But Romeo may not more validity More honourable state more courtship lives In carrion-flies than Romeo they my seize On the white wonder of dear Juliets hand And steal immortal blessing from her lips Who even in pure and vestal modesty Still blush as thinking their own kisses sin But Romeo may not he is banished Flies may do this but from this must fly They are free men but am banished. And sayst thou yet that exile is not death? Hadst thou no poison mixd no sharp-ground knife No sudden mean of death though neer so mean But banished to kill me?--banished? friar the damned use that word in hell Howlings attend it how hast thou the heart Being a divine a ghostly confessor sin-absolver and my friend professd To mangle me with that word banished? Thou fond mad man hear me but speak a word. thou wilt speak again of banishment. Ill give thee armour to keep off that word Adversitys sweet milk philosophy To comfort thee though thou art banished. Yet banished? Hang up philosophy! Unless philosophy can make a Juliet Displant a town reverse a princes doom It helps not it prevails not talk no more. then see that madmen have no ears. How should they when that wise men have no eyes? Let me dispute with thee of thy estate. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel Wert thou as young as Juliet thy love An hour but married Tybalt murdered Doting like me and like me banished Then mightst thou speak then mightst thou tear thy hair And fall upon the ground as do now Taking the measure of an unmade grave. Knocking within Arise one knocks good Romeo hide thyself. Not unless the breath of heartsick groans Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes. Knocking Hark how they knock! Whos there? Romeo arise Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up Knocking Run to my study. By and by! Gods will What simpleness is this! come come! Knocking Who knocks so hard? whence come you? whats your will? Nurse Within Let me come in and you shall know my errand come from Lady Juliet. Welcome then. Enter Nurse Nurse holy friar tell me holy friar Where is my ladys lord wheres Romeo? There on the ground with his own tears made drunk. Nurse he is even in my mistress case Just in her case! woful sympathy! Piteous predicament! Even so lies she Blubbering and weeping weeping and blubbering. Stand up stand up stand and you be a man For Juliets sake for her sake rise and stand Why should you fall into so deep an Nurse! Nurse Ah sir! ah sir! Well deaths the end of all. Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her? Doth she not think me an old murderer Now have staind the childhood of our joy With blood removed but little from her own? Where is she? and how doth she? and what says My conceald lady to our cancelld love? Nurse she says nothing sir but weeps and weeps And now falls on her bed and then starts up And Tybalt calls and then on Romeo cries And then down falls again. As if that name Shot from the deadly level of a gun Did murder her as that names cursed hand Murderd her kinsman. tell me friar tell me In what vile part of this anatomy Doth my name lodge? tell me that may sack The hateful mansion. Drawing his sword Hold thy desperate hand Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art Thy tears are womanish thy wild acts denote The unreasonable fury of a beast Unseemly woman in a seeming man! Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both! Thou hast amazed me by my holy order thought thy disposition better temperd. Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself? And stay thy lady too that lives in thee By doing damned hate upon thyself? Why railst thou on thy birth the heaven and earth? Since birth and heaven and earth all three do meet In thee at once which thou at once wouldst lose. Fie fie thou shamest thy shape thy love thy wit Which like a usurer aboundst in all And usest none in that true use indeed Which should bedeck thy shape thy love thy wit Thy noble shape is but a form of wax Digressing from the valour of a man Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury Killing that love which thou hast vowd to cherish Thy wit that ornament to shape and love Misshapen in the conduct of them both Like powder in a skitless soldiers flask Is set afire by thine own ignorance And thou dismemberd with thine own defence. What rouse thee man! thy Juliet is alive For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead There art thou happy Tybalt would kill thee But thou slewst Tybalt there are thou happy too The law that threatend death becomes thy friend And turns it to exile there art thou happy pack of blessings lights up upon thy back Happiness courts thee in her best array But like a misbehaved and sullen wench Thou poutst upon thy fortune and thy love Take heed take heed for such die miserable. Go get thee to thy love as was decreed Ascend her chamber hence and comfort her But look thou stay not till the watch be set For then thou canst not pass to Mantua Where thou shalt live till we can find a time To blaze your marriage reconcile your friends Beg pardon of the prince and call thee back With twenty hundred thousand times more joy Than thou wentst forth in lamentation. Go before nurse commend me to thy lady And bid her hasten all the house to bed Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto Romeo is coming. Nurse Lord could have stayd here all the night To hear good counsel what learning is! My lord Ill tell my lady you will come. Do so and bid my sweet prepare to chide. Nurse Here sir a ring she bid me give you sir Hie you make haste for it grows very late. Exit How well my comfort is revived by this! Go hence good night and here stands all your state Either be gone before the watch be set Or by the break of day disguised from hence Sojourn in Mantua Ill find out your man And he shall signify from time to time Every good hap to you that chances here Give me thy hand tis late farewell good night. But that a joy past joy calls out on me It were a grief so brief to part with thee Farewell. Exeunt room in Capulets house. Enter and Things have falln out sir so unluckily That we have had no time to move our daughter Look you she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly And so did I--Well we were born to die. Tis very late shell not come down to-night promise you but for your company would have been a-bed an hour ago. These times of woe afford no time to woo. Madam good night commend me to your daughter. will and know her mind early to-morrow To-night she is mewd up to her heaviness. Sir Paris will make a desperate tender Of my childs love think she will be ruled In all respects by me nay more doubt it not. Wife go you to her ere you go to bed Acquaint her here of my son Paris love And bid her mark you me on Wednesday next-- But soft! what day is this? Monday my lord Monday! ha ha! Well Wednesday is too soon Thursday let it be o Thursday tell her She shall be married to this noble earl. Will you be ready? do you like this haste? Well keep no great ado--a friend or two For hark you Tybalt being slain so late It may be thought we held him carelessly Being our kinsman if we revel much Therefore well have some half a dozen friends And there an end. But what say you to Thursday? My lord would that Thursday were to-morrow. Well get you gone o Thursday be it then. Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed Prepare her wife against this wedding-day. Farewell my lord. Light to my chamber ho! Afore me! it is so very very late That we may call it early by and by. Good night. Exeunt Capulets orchard. Enter and above at the window Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day It was the nightingale and not the lark That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree Believe me love it was the nightingale. It was the lark the herald of the morn No nightingale look love what envious streaks Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east Nights candles are burnt out and jocund day Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops. must be gone and live or stay and die. Yon light is not day-light know it It is some meteor that the sun exhales To be to thee this night a torch-bearer And light thee on thy way to Mantua Therefore stay yet thou needst not to be gone. Let me be taen let me be put to death am content so thou wilt have it so. Ill say yon grey is not the mornings eye Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthias brow Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat The vaulty heaven so high above our heads have more care to stay than will to go Come death and welcome! Juliet wills it so. How ist my soul? lets talk it is not day. It is it is hie hence be gone away! It is the lark that sings so out of tune Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. Some say the lark makes sweet division This doth not so for she divideth us Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes now would they had changed voices too! Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray Hunting thee hence with hunts-up to the day now be gone more light and light it grows. More light and light more dark and dark our woes! Enter Nurse to the chamber Nurse Madam! Nurse? Nurse Your lady mother is coming to your chamber The day is broke be wary look about. Exit Then window let day in and let life out. Farewell farewell! one kiss and Ill descend. He goeth down Art thou gone so? love lord ay husband friend! must hear from thee every day in the hour For in a minute there are many days by this count shall be much in years Ere again behold my Romeo! Farewell! will omit no opportunity That may convey my greetings love to thee. thinkst thou we shall ever meet again? doubt it not and all these woes shall serve For sweet discourses in our time to come. God have an ill-divining soul! Methinks see thee now thou art below As one dead in the bottom of a tomb Either my eyesight fails or thou lookst pale. And trust me love in my eye so do you Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu adieu! Exit fortune fortune! all men call thee fickle If thou art fickle what dost thou with him. That is renownd for faith? Be fickle fortune For then hope thou wilt not keep him long But send him back. Within Ho daughter! are you up? Who ist that calls? is it my lady mother? Is she not down so late or up so early? What unaccustomd cause procures her hither? Enter Why how now Juliet! Madam am not well. Evermore weeping for your cousins death? What wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? An if thou couldst thou couldst not make him live Therefore have done some grief shows much of love But much of grief shows still some want of wit. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss. So shall you feel the loss but not the friend Which you weep for. Feeling so the loss Cannot choose but ever weep the friend. Well girl thou weepst not so much for his death As that the villain lives which slaughterd him. What villain madam? That same villain Romeo. Aside Villain and he be many miles asunder.-- God Pardon him! do with all my heart And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart. That is because the traitor murderer lives. Ay madam from the reach of these my hands Would none but might venge my cousins death! We will have vengeance for it fear thou not Then weep no more. Ill send to one in Mantua Where that same banishd runagate doth live Shall give him such an unaccustomd dram That he shall soon keep Tybalt company And then hope thou wilt be satisfied. Indeed never shall be satisfied With Romeo till behold him--dead-- Is my poor heart for a kinsman vexd. Madam if you could find out but a man To bear a poison would temper it That Romeo should upon receipt thereof Soon sleep in quiet. how my heart abhors To hear him named and cannot come to him. To wreak the love bore my cousin Upon his body that slaughterd him! Find thou the means and Ill find such a man. But now Ill tell thee joyful tidings girl. And joy comes well in such a needy time What are they beseech your ladyship? Well well thou hast a careful father child One who to put thee from thy heaviness Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy That thou expectst not nor lookd not for. Madam in happy time what day is that? Marry my child early next Thursday morn The gallant young and noble gentleman The County Paris at Saint Peters Church Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride. Now by Saint Peters Church and Peter too He shall not make me there a joyful bride. wonder at this haste that must wed Ere he that should be husband comes to woo. pray you tell my lord and father madam will not marry yet and when do swear It shall be Romeo whom you know hate Rather than Paris. These are news indeed! Here comes your father tell him so yourself And see how he will take it at your hands. Enter and Nurse When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew But for the sunset of my brothers son It rains downright. How now! a conduit girl? what still in tears? Evermore showering? In one little body Thou counterfeitst a bark a sea a wind For still thy eyes which may call the sea Do ebb and flow with tears the bark thy body is Sailing in this salt flood the winds thy sighs Who raging with thy tears and they with them Without a sudden calm will overset Thy tempest-tossed body. How now wife! Have you deliverd to her our decree? Ay sir but she will none she gives you thanks. would the fool were married to her grave! Soft! take me with you take me with you wife. How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks? Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest Unworthy as she is that we have wrought So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom? Not proud you have but thankful that you have Proud can never be of what hate But thankful even for hate that is meant love. How now how now chop-logic! What is this? Proud and thank you and thank you not And yet not proud mistress minion you Thank me no thankings nor proud me no prouds But fettle your fine joints gainst Thursday next To go with Paris to Saint Peters Church Or will drag thee on a hurdle thither. Out you green-sickness carrion! out you baggage! You tallow-face! Fie fie! what are you mad? Good father beseech you on my knees Hear me with patience but to speak a word. Hang thee young baggage! disobedient wretch! tell thee what get thee to church o Thursday Or never after look me in the face Speak not reply not do not answer me My fingers itch. Wife we scarce thought us blest That God had lent us but this only child But now see this one is one too much And that we have a curse in having her Out on her hilding! Nurse God in heaven bless her! You are to blame my lord to rate her so. And why my lady wisdom? hold your tongue Good prudence smatter with your gossips go. Nurse speak no treason. God ye god-den. Nurse May not one speak? Peace you mumbling fool! Utter your gravity oer a gossips bowl For here we need it not. You are too hot. Gods bread! it makes me mad Day night hour tide time work play Alone in company still my care hath been To have her matchd and having now provided gentleman of noble parentage Of fair demesnes youthful and nobly traind Stuffd as they say with honourable parts Proportiond as ones thought would wish a man And then to have a wretched puling fool whining mammet in her fortunes tender To answer Ill not wed cannot love am too young pray you pardon me. But as you will not wed Ill pardon you Graze where you will you shall not house with me Look tot think ont do not use to jest. Thursday is near lay hand on heart advise An you be mine Ill give you to my friend And you be not hang beg starve die in the streets For by my soul Ill neer acknowledge thee Nor what is mine shall never do thee good Trust tot bethink you Ill not be forsworn. Exit Is there no pity sitting in the clouds That sees into the bottom of my grief? sweet my mother cast me not away! Delay this marriage for a month a week Or if you do not make the bridal bed In that dim monument where Tybalt lies. Talk not to me for Ill not speak a word Do as thou wilt for have done with thee. Exit God!--O nurse how shall this be prevented? My husband is on earth my faith in heaven How shall that faith return again to earth Unless that husband send it me from heaven By leaving earth? comfort me counsel me. Alack alack that heaven should practise stratagems Upon so soft a subject as myself! What sayst thou? hast thou not a word of joy? Some comfort nurse. Nurse Faith here it is. Romeo is banishd and all the world to nothing That he dares neer come back to challenge you Or if he do it needs must be by stealth. Then since the case so stands as now it doth think it best you married with the county. hes a lovely gentleman! Romeos a dishclout to him an eagle madam Hath not so green so quick so fair an eye As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart think you are happy in this second match For it excels your first or if it did not Your first is dead or twere as good he were As living here and you no use of him. Speakest thou from thy heart? Nurse And from my soul too Or else beshrew them both. Amen! Nurse What? Well thou hast comforted me marvellous much. Go in and tell my lady am gone Having displeased my father to Laurence cell To make confession and to be absolved. Nurse Marry will and this is wisely done. Exit Ancient damnation! most wicked fiend! Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue Which she hath praised him with above compare So many thousand times? Go counsellor Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. Ill to the friar to know his remedy If all else fail myself have power to die. Exit Friar Laurences cell. Enter and On Thursday sir? the time is very short. My father Capulet will have it so And am nothing slow to slack his haste. You say you do not know the ladys mind Uneven is the course like it not. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalts death And therefore have little talkd of love For Venus smiles not in a house of tears. Now sir her father counts it dangerous That she doth give her sorrow so much sway And in his wisdom hastes our marriage To stop the inundation of her tears Which too much minded by herself alone May be put from her by society Now do you know the reason of this haste. Aside would knew not why it should be slowd. Look sir here comes the lady towards my cell. Enter Happily met my lady and my wife! That may be sir when may be a wife. That may be must be love on Thursday next. What must be shall be. Thats a certain text. Come you to make confession to this father? To answer that should confess to you. Do not deny to him that you love me. will confess to you that love him. So will ye am sure that you love me. If do so it will be of more price Being spoke behind your back than to your face. Poor soul thy face is much abused with tears. The tears have got small victory by that For it was bad enough before their spite. Thou wrongst it more than tears with that report. That is no slander sir which is a truth And what spake spake it to my face. Thy face is mine and thou hast slanderd it. It may be so for it is not mine own. Are you at leisure holy father now Or shall come to you at evening mass? My leisure serves me pensive daughter now. My lord we must entreat the time alone. God shield should disturb devotion! Juliet on Thursday early will rouse ye Till then adieu and keep this holy kiss. Exit shut the door! and when thou hast done so Come weep with me past hope past cure past help! Ah Juliet already know thy grief It strains me past the compass of my wits hear thou must and nothing may prorogue it On Thursday next be married to this county. Tell me not friar that thou hearst of this Unless thou tell me how may prevent it If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help Do thou but call my resolution wise And with this knife Ill help it presently. God joind my heart and Romeos thou our hands And ere this hand by thee to Romeo seald Shall be the label to another deed Or my true heart with treacherous revolt Turn to another this shall slay them both Therefore out of thy long-experienced time Give me some present counsel or behold Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife Shall play the umpire arbitrating that Which the commission of thy years and art Could to no issue of true honour bring. Be not so long to speak long to die If what thou speakst speak not of remedy. Hold daughter do spy a kind of hope Which craves as desperate an execution. As that is desperate which we would prevent. If rather than to marry County Paris Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself Then is it likely thou wilt undertake thing like death to chide away this shame That copest with death himself to scape from it And if thou darest Ill give thee remedy. bid me leap rather than marry Paris From off the battlements of yonder tower Or walk in thievish ways or bid me lurk Where serpents are chain me with roaring bears Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house Oer-coverd quite with dead mens rattling bones With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls Or bid me go into a new-made grave And hide me with a dead man in his shroud Things that to hear them told have made me tremble And will do it without fear or doubt To live an unstaind wife to my sweet love. Hold then go home be merry give consent To marry Paris Wednesday is to-morrow To-morrow night look that thou lie alone Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber Take thou this vial being then in bed And this distilled liquor drink thou off When presently through all thy veins shall run cold and drowsy humour for no pulse Shall keep his native progress but surcease No warmth no breath shall testify thou livest The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade To paly ashes thy eyes windows fall Like death when he shuts up the day of life Each part deprived of supple government Shall stiff and stark and cold appear like death And in this borrowd likeness of shrunk death Thou shalt continue two and forty hours And then awake as from a pleasant sleep. Now when the bridegroom in the morning comes To rouse thee from thy bed there art thou dead Then as the manner of our country is In thy best robes uncoverd on the bier Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie. In the mean time against thou shalt awake Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift And hither shall he come and he and Will watch thy waking and that very night Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua. And this shall free thee from this present shame If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear Abate thy valour in the acting it. Give me give me! tell not me of fear! Hold get you gone be strong and prosperous In this resolve Ill send a friar with speed To Mantua with my letters to thy lord. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford. Farewell dear father! Exeunt Hall in Capulets house. Enter Nurse and two Servingmen So many guests invite as here are writ. Exit First Servant Sirrah go hire me twenty cunning cooks. Second Servant You shall have none ill sir for Ill try if they can lick their fingers. How canst thou try them so? Second Servant Marry sir tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me. Go be gone. Exit Second Servant We shall be much unfurnished for this time. What is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence? Nurse Ay forsooth. Well he may chance to do some good on her peevish self-willd harlotry it is. Nurse See where she comes from shrift with merry look. Enter How now my headstrong! where have you been gadding? Where have learnd me to repent the sin Of disobedient opposition To you and your behests and am enjoind By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here And beg your pardon pardon beseech you! Henceforward am ever ruled by you. Send for the county go tell him of this Ill have this knot knit up to-morrow morning. met the youthful lord at Laurence cell And gave him what becomed love might Not step oer the bounds of modesty. Why am glad ont this is well stand up This is ast should be. Let me see the county Ay marry go say and fetch him hither. Now afore God! this reverend holy friar Our whole city is much bound to him. Nurse will you go with me into my closet To help me sort such needful ornaments As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow? No not till Thursday there is time enough. Go nurse go with her well to church to-morrow. Exeunt and Nurse We shall be short in our provision Tis now near night. Tush will stir about And all things shall be well warrant thee wife Go thou to Juliet help to deck up her Ill not to bed to-night let me alone Ill play the housewife for this once. What ho! They are all forth. Well will walk myself To County Paris to prepare him up Against to-morrow my heart is wondrous light Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimd. Exeunt Juliets chamber. Enter and Nurse Ay those attires are best but gentle nurse pray thee leave me to myself to-night For have need of many orisons To move the heavens to smile upon my state Which well thou knowst is cross and full of sin. Enter What are you busy ho? need you my help? No madam we have culld such necessaries As are behoveful for our state to-morrow So please you let me now be left alone And let the nurse this night sit up with you For am sure you have your hands full all In this so sudden business. Good night Get thee to bed and rest for thou hast need. Exeunt and Nurse Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again. have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins That almost freezes up the heat of life Ill call them back again to comfort me Nurse! What should she do here? My dismal scene needs must act alone. Come vial. What if this mixture do not work at all? Shall be married then to-morrow morning? No no this shall forbid it lie thou there. Laying down her dagger What if it be a poison which the friar Subtly hath ministerd to have me dead Lest in this marriage he should be dishonourd Because he married me before to Romeo? fear it is and yet methinks it should not For he hath still been tried a holy man. How if when am laid into the tomb wake before the time that Romeo Come to redeem me? theres a fearful point! Shall not then be stifled in the vault To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes? Or if live is it not very like The horrible conceit of death and night Together with the terror of the place-- As in a vault an ancient receptacle Where for these many hundred years the bones Of all my buried ancestors are packed Where bloody Tybalt yet but green in earth Lies festering in his shroud where as they say At some hours in the night spirits resort-- Alack alack is it not like that So early waking what with loathsome smells And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth That living mortals hearing them run mad-- if wake shall not be distraught Environed with all these hideous fears? And madly play with my forefathers joints? And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud? And in this rage with some great kinsmans bone As with a club dash out my desperate brains? look! methinks see my cousins ghost Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body Upon a rapiers point stay Tybalt stay! Romeo come! this do drink to thee. She falls upon her bed within the curtains Hall in Capulets house. Enter and Nurse Hold take these keys and fetch more spices nurse. Nurse They call for dates and quinces in the pastry. Enter Come stir stir stir! the second cock hath crowd The curfew-bell hath rung tis three oclock Look to the baked meats good Angelica Spare not for the cost. Nurse Go you cot-quean go Get you to bed faith Youll be sick to-morrow For this nights watching. No not a whit what! have watchd ere now All night for lesser cause and neer been sick. Ay you have been a mouse-hunt in your time But will watch you from such watching now. Exeunt and Nurse jealous hood a jealous hood! Enter three or four Servingmen with spits logs and baskets Now fellow Whats there? First Servant Things for the cook sir but know not what. Make haste make haste. Exit First Servant Sirrah fetch drier logs Call Peter he will show thee where they are. Second Servant have a head sir that will find out logs And never trouble Peter for the matter. Exit Mass and well said a merry whoreson ha! Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith tis day The county will be here with music straight For so he said he would hear him near. Music within Nurse! Wife! What ho! What nurse say! Re-enter Nurse Go waken Juliet go and trim her up Ill go and chat with Paris hie make haste Make haste the bridegroom he is come already Make haste say. Exeunt Juliets chamber. Enter Nurse Nurse Mistress! what mistress! Juliet! fast warrant her she Why lamb! why lady! fie you slug-a-bed! Why love say! madam! sweet-heart! why bride! What not a word? you take your pennyworths now Sleep for a week for the next night warrant The County Paris hath set up his rest That you shall rest but little. God forgive me Marry and amen how sound is she asleep! must needs wake her. Madam madam madam! Ay let the county take you in your bed Hell fright you up i faith. Will it not be? Undraws the curtains What dressd! and in your clothes! and down again! must needs wake you Lady! lady! lady! Alas alas! Help help! my ladys dead! well-a-day that ever was born! Some aqua vitae ho! My lord! my lady! Enter What noise is here? Nurse lamentable day! What is the matter? Nurse Look look! heavy day! me me! My child my only life Revive look up or will die with thee! Help help! Call help. Enter For shame bring Juliet forth her lord is come. Nurse Shes dead deceased shes dead alack the day! Alack the day shes dead shes dead shes dead! Ha! let me see her out alas! shes cold Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff Life and these lips have long been separated Death lies on her like an untimely frost Upon the sweetest flower of all the field. Nurse lamentable day! woful time! Death that hath taen her hence to make me wail Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak. Enter and with Musicians Come is the bride ready to go to church? Ready to go but never to return. son! the night before thy wedding-day Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies Flower as she was deflowered by him. Death is my son-in-law Death is my heir My daughter he hath wedded will die And leave him all life living all is Deaths. Have thought long to see this mornings face And doth it give me such a sight as this? Accursed unhappy wretched hateful day! Most miserable hour that eer time saw In lasting labour of his pilgrimage! But one poor one one poor and loving child But one thing to rejoice and solace in And cruel death hath catchd it from my sight! Nurse woe! woful woful woful day! Most lamentable day most woful day That ever ever did yet behold! day! day! day! hateful day! Never was seen so black a day as this woful day woful day! Beguiled divorced wronged spited slain! Most detestable death by thee beguild By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown! love! life! not life but love in death! Despised distressed hated martyrd killd! Uncomfortable time why camest thou now To murder murder our solemnity? child! child! my soul and not my child! Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead And with my child my joys are buried. Peace ho for shame! confusions cure lives not In these confusions. Heaven and yourself Had part in this fair maid now heaven hath all And all the better is it for the maid Your part in her you could not keep from death But heaven keeps his part in eternal life. The most you sought was her promotion For twas your heaven she should be advanced And weep ye now seeing she is advanced Above the clouds as high as heaven itself? in this love you love your child so ill That you run mad seeing that she is well Shes not well married that lives married long But shes best married that dies married young. Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary On this fair corse and as the custom is In all her best array bear her to church For though fond nature bids us an lament Yet natures tears are reasons merriment. All things that we ordained festival Turn from their office to black funeral Our instruments to melancholy bells Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse And all things change them to the contrary. Sir go you in and madam go with him And go Sir Paris every one prepare To follow this fair corse unto her grave The heavens do lour upon you for some ill Move them no more by crossing their high will. Exeunt and First Musician Faith we may put up our pipes and be gone. Nurse Honest goodfellows ah put up put up For well you know this is a pitiful case. Exit First Musician Ay by my troth the case may be amended. Enter Musicians musicians Hearts ease Hearts ease an you will have me live play Hearts ease. First Musician Why Hearts ease? musicians because my heart itself plays My heart is full of woe play me some merry dump to comfort me. First Musician Not a dump we tis no time to play now. You will not then? First Musician No. will then give it you soundly. First Musician What will you give us? No money on my faith but the gleek will give you the minstrel. First Musician Then will give you the serving-creature. Then will lay the serving-creatures dagger on your pate. will carry no crotchets Ill re you Ill fa you do you note me? First Musician An you re us and fa us you note us. Second Musician Pray you put up your dagger and put out your wit. Then have at you with my wit! will dry-beat you with an iron wit and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men When griping grief the heart doth wound And doleful dumps the mind oppress Then music with her silver sound-- why silver sound? why music with her silver sound? What say you Simon Catling? Musician Marry sir because silver hath a sweet sound. Pretty! What say you Hugh Rebeck? Second Musician say silver sound because musicians sound for silver. Pretty too! What say you James Soundpost? Third Musician Faith know not what to say. cry you mercy you are the singer will say for you. It is music with her silver sound because musicians have no gold for sounding Then music with her silver sound With speedy help doth lend redress. Exit First Musician What a pestilent knave is this same! Second Musician Hang him Jack! Come well in here tarry for the mourners and stay dinner. Exeunt Mantua. street. Enter If may trust the flattering truth of sleep My dreams presage some joyful news at hand My bosoms lord sits lightly in his throne And all this day an unaccustomd spirit Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. dreamt my lady came and found me dead-- Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!-- And breathed such life with kisses in my lips That revived and was an emperor. Ah me! how sweet is love itself possessd When but loves shadows are so rich in joy! Enter booted News from Verona!--How now Balthasar! Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? How doth my lady? Is my father well? How fares my Juliet? that ask again For nothing can be ill if she be well. Then she is well and nothing can be ill Her body sleeps in Capels monument And her immortal part with angels lives. saw her laid low in her kindreds vault And presently took post to tell it you pardon me for bringing these ill news Since you did leave it for my office sir. Is it even so? then defy you stars! Thou knowst my lodging get me ink and paper And hire post-horses will hence to-night. do beseech you sir have patience Your looks are pale and wild and do import Some misadventure. Tush thou art deceived Leave me and do the thing bid thee do. Hast thou no letters to me from the friar? No my good lord. No matter get thee gone And hire those horses Ill be with thee straight. Exit Well Juliet will lie with thee to-night. Lets see for means mischief thou art swift To enter in the thoughts of desperate men! do remember an apothecary-- And hereabouts he dwells--which late noted In tatterd weeds with overwhelming brows Culling of simples meagre were his looks Sharp misery had worn him to the bones And in his needy shop a tortoise hung An alligator stuffd and other skins Of ill-shaped fishes and about his shelves beggarly account of empty boxes Green earthen pots bladders and musty seeds Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses Were thinly scatterd to make up a show. Noting this penury to myself said An if a man did need a poison now Whose sale is present death in Mantua Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him. this same thought did but forerun my need And this same needy man must sell it me. As remember this should be the house. Being holiday the beggars shop is shut. What ho! apothecary! Enter Apothecary Apothecary Who calls so loud? Come hither man. see that thou art poor Hold there is forty ducats let me have dram of poison such soon-speeding gear As will disperse itself through all the veins That the life-weary taker may fall dead And that the trunk may be discharged of breath As violently as hasty powder fired Doth hurry from the fatal cannons womb. Apothecary Such mortal drugs have but Mantuas law Is death to any he that utters them. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness And fearst to die? famine is in thy cheeks Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back The world is not thy friend nor the worlds law The world affords no law to make thee rich Then be not poor but break it and take this. Apothecary My poverty but not my will consents. pay thy poverty and not thy will. Apothecary Put this in any liquid thing you will And drink it off and if you had the strength Of twenty men it would dispatch you straight. There is thy gold worse poison to mens souls Doing more murders in this loathsome world Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. sell thee poison thou hast sold me none. Farewell buy food and get thyself in flesh. Come cordial and not poison go with me To Juliets grave for there must use thee. Exeunt Friar Laurences cell. Enter Holy Franciscan friar! brother ho! Enter This same should be the voice of Friar John. Welcome from Mantua what says Romeo? Or if his mind be writ give me his letter. Going to find a bare-foot brother out One of our order to associate me Here in this city visiting the sick And finding him the searchers of the town Suspecting that we both were in a house Where the infectious pestilence did reign Seald up the doors and would not let us forth So that my speed to Mantua there was stayd. Who bare my letter then to Romeo? could not send it--here it is again-- Nor get a messenger to bring it thee So fearful were they of infection. Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood The letter was not nice but full of charge Of dear import and the neglecting it May do much danger. Friar John go hence Get me an iron crow and bring it straight Unto my cell. Brother Ill go and bring it thee. Exit Now must to the monument alone Within three hours will fair Juliet wake She will beshrew me much that Romeo Hath had no notice of these accidents But will write again to Mantua And keep her at my cell till Romeo come Poor living corse closed in a dead mans tomb! Exit churchyard in it a tomb belonging to the Capulets. Enter and his Page bearing flowers and a torch Give me thy torch boy hence and stand aloof Yet put it out for would not be seen. Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread Being loose unfirm with digging up of graves But thou shalt hear it whistle then to me As signal that thou hearst something approach. Give me those flowers. Do as bid thee go. Aside am almost afraid to stand alone Here in the churchyard yet will adventure. Retires Sweet flower with flowers thy bridal bed strew-- woe! thy canopy is dust and stones-- Which with sweet water nightly will dew Or wanting that with tears distilld by moans The obsequies that for thee will keep Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep. The Page whistles The boy gives warning something doth approach. What cursed foot wanders this way to-night To cross my obsequies and true loves rite? What with a torch! muffle me night awhile. Retires Enter and with a torch mattock c Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. Hold take this letter early in the morning See thou deliver it to my lord and father. Give me the light upon thy life charge thee Whateer thou hearst or seest stand all aloof And do not interrupt me in my course. Why descend into this bed of death Is partly to behold my ladys face But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger precious ring a ring that must use In dear employment therefore hence be gone But if thou jealous dost return to pry In what further shall intend to do By heaven will tear thee joint by joint And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs The time and my intents are savage-wild More fierce and more inexorable far Than empty tigers or the roaring sea. will be gone sir and not trouble you. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that Live and be prosperous and farewell good fellow. Aside For all this same Ill hide me hereabout His looks fear and his intents doubt. Retires Thou detestable maw thou womb of death Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth Thus enforce thy rotten jaws to open And in despite Ill cram thee with more food! Opens the tomb This is that banishd haughty Montague That murderd my loves cousin with which grief It is supposed the fair creature died And here is come to do some villanous shame To the dead bodies will apprehend him. Comes forward Stop thy unhallowd toil vile Montague! Can vengeance be pursued further than death? Condemned villain do apprehend thee Obey and go with me for thou must die. must indeed and therefore came hither. Good gentle youth tempt not a desperate man Fly hence and leave me think upon these gone Let them affright thee. beseech thee youth Put not another sin upon my head By urging me to fury be gone! By heaven love thee better than myself For come hither armd against myself Stay not be gone live and hereafter say madmans mercy bade thee run away. do defy thy conjurations And apprehend thee for a felon here. Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee boy! They fight Lord they fight! will go call the watch. Exit am slain! Falls If thou be merciful Open the tomb lay me with Juliet. Dies In faith will. Let me peruse this face. Mercutios kinsman noble County Paris! What said my man when my betossed soul Did not attend him as we rode? think He told me Paris should have married Juliet Said he not so? or did dream it so? Or am mad hearing him talk of Juliet To think it was so? give me thy hand One writ with me in sour misfortunes book! Ill bury thee in a triumphant grave grave? no! a lantern slaughterd youth For here lies Juliet and her beauty makes This vault a feasting presence full of light. Death lie thou there by a dead man interrd. Laying in the tomb How oft when men are at the point of death Have they been merry! which their keepers call lightning before death how may Call this a lightning? my love! my wife! Death that hath suckd the honey of thy breath Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty Thou art not conquerd beautys ensign yet Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks And deaths pale flag is not advanced there. Tybalt liest thou there in thy bloody sheet? what more favour can do to thee Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain To sunder his that was thine enemy? Forgive me cousin! Ah dear Juliet Why art thou yet so fair? shall believe That unsubstantial death is amorous And that the lean abhorred monster keeps Thee here in dark to be his paramour? For fear of that still will stay with thee And never from this palace of dim night Depart again here here will remain With worms that are thy chamber-maids here Will set up my everlasting rest And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes look your last! Arms take your last embrace! and lips you The doors of breath seal with a righteous kiss dateless bargain to engrossing death! Come bitter conduct come unsavoury guide! Thou desperate pilot now at once run on The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark! Heres to my love! Drinks true apothecary! Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss die. Dies Enter at the other end of the churchyard with a lantern crow and spade Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Whos there? Heres one a friend and one that knows you well. Bliss be upon you! Tell me good my friend What torch is yond that vainly lends his light To grubs and eyeless skulls? as discern It burneth in the Capels monument. It doth so holy sir and theres my master One that you love. Who is it? Romeo. How long hath he been there? Full half an hour. Go with me to the vault. dare not sir My master knows not but am gone hence And fearfully did menace me with death If did stay to look on his intents. Stay then Ill go alone. Fear comes upon me much fear some ill unlucky thing. As did sleep under this yew-tree here dreamt my master and another fought And that my master slew him. Romeo! Advances Alack alack what blood is this which stains The stony entrance of this sepulchre? What mean these masterless and gory swords To lie discolourd by this place of peace? Enters the tomb Romeo! pale! Who else? what Paris too? And steepd in blood? Ah what an unkind hour Is guilty of this lamentable chance! The lady stirs. wakes comfortable friar! where is my lord? do remember well where should be And there am. Where is my Romeo? Noise within hear some noise. Lady come from that nest Of death contagion and unnatural sleep greater power than we can contradict Hath thwarted our intents. Come come away. Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead And Paris too. Come Ill dispose of thee Among a sisterhood of holy nuns Stay not to question for the watch is coming Come go good Juliet Noise again dare no longer stay. Go get thee hence for will not away. Exit Whats here? a cup closed in my true loves hand? Poison see hath been his timeless end churl! drunk all and left no friendly drop To help me after? will kiss thy lips Haply some poison yet doth hang on them To make die with a restorative. Kisses him Thy lips are warm. First Watchman Within Lead boy which way? Yea noise? then Ill be brief. happy dagger! Snatching ROMEOs dagger This is thy sheath Stabs herself there rust and let me die. Falls on ROMEOs body and dies Enter Watch with the Page of This is the place there where the torch doth burn. First Watchman The ground is bloody search about the churchyard Go some of you whoeer you find attach. Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain And Juliet bleeding warm and newly dead Who here hath lain these two days buried. Go tell the prince run to the Capulets Raise up the Montagues some others search We see the ground whereon these woes do lie But the true ground of all these piteous woes We cannot without circumstance descry. Re-enter some of the Watch with Second Watchman Heres Romeos man we found him in the churchyard. First Watchman Hold him in safety till the prince come hither. Re-enter others of the Watch with Third Watchman Here is a friar that trembles sighs and weeps We took this mattock and this spade from him As he was coming from this churchyard side. First Watchman great suspicion stay the friar too. Enter the and Attendants What misadventure is so early up That calls our person from our mornings rest? Enter and others What should it be that they so shriek abroad? The people in the street cry Romeo Some Juliet and some Paris and all run With open outcry toward our monument. What fear is this which startles in our ears? First Watchman Sovereign here lies the County Paris slain And Romeo dead and Juliet dead before Warm and new killd. Search seek and know how this foul murder comes. First Watchman Here is a friar and slaughterd Romeos man With instruments upon them fit to open These dead mens tombs. heavens! wife look how our daughter bleeds! This dagger hath mistaen--for lo his house Is empty on the back of Montague-- And it mis-sheathed in my daughters bosom! me! this sight of death is as a bell That warns my old age to a sepulchre. Enter and others Come Montague for thou art early up To see thy son and heir more early down. Alas my liege my wife is dead to-night Grief of my sons exile hath stoppd her breath What further woe conspires against mine age? Look and thou shalt see. thou untaught! what manners is in this? To press before thy father to a grave? Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while Till we can clear these ambiguities And know their spring their head their true descent And then will be general of your woes And lead you even to death meantime forbear And let mischance be slave to patience. Bring forth the parties of suspicion. am the greatest able to do least Yet most suspected as the time and place Doth make against me of this direful murder And here stand both to impeach and purge Myself condemned and myself excused. Then say at once what thou dost know in this. will be brief for my short date of breath Is not so long as is a tedious tale. Romeo there dead was husband to that Juliet And she there dead that Romeos faithful wife married them and their stoln marriage-day Was Tybalts dooms-day whose untimely death Banishd the new-made bridegroom from the city For whom and not for Tybalt Juliet pined. You to remove that siege of grief from her Betrothd and would have married her perforce To County Paris then comes she to me And with wild looks bid me devise some mean To rid her from this second marriage Or in my cell there would she kill herself. Then gave her so tutord by my art sleeping potion which so took effect As intended for it wrought on her The form of death meantime writ to Romeo That he should hither come as this dire night To help to take her from her borrowd grave Being the time the potions force should cease. But he which bore my letter Friar John Was stayd by accident and yesternight Returnd my letter back. Then all alone At the prefixed hour of her waking Came to take her from her kindreds vault Meaning to keep her closely at my cell Till conveniently could send to Romeo But when came some minute ere the time Of her awaking here untimely lay The noble Paris and true Romeo dead. She wakes and entreated her come forth And bear this work of heaven with patience But then a noise did scare me from the tomb And she too desperate would not go with me But as it seems did violence on herself. All this know and to the marriage Her nurse is privy and if aught in this Miscarried by my fault let my old life Be sacrificed some hour before his time Unto the rigour of severest law. We still have known thee for a holy man. Wheres Romeos man? what can he say in this? brought my master news of Juliets death And then in post he came from Mantua To this same place to this same monument. This letter he early bid me give his father And threatened me with death going in the vault departed not and left him there. Give me the letter will look on it. Where is the countys page that raised the watch? Sirrah what made your master in this place? He came with flowers to strew his ladys grave And bid me stand aloof and so did Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb And by and by my master drew on him And then ran away to call the watch. This letter doth make good the friars words Their course of love the tidings of her death And here he writes that he did buy a poison Of a poor pothecary and therewithal Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet. Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague! See what a scourge is laid upon your hate That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love. And for winking at your discords too Have lost a brace of kinsmen all are punishd. brother Montague give me thy hand This is my daughters jointure for no more Can demand. But can give thee more For will raise her statue in pure gold That while Verona by that name is known There shall no figure at such rate be set As that of true and faithful Juliet. As rich shall Romeos by his ladys lie Poor sacrifices of our enmity! glooming peace this morning with it brings The sun for sorrow will not show his head Go hence to have more talk of these sad things Some shall be pardond and some punished For never was a story of more woe Than this of Juliet and her Romeo. Exeunt 